Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Norbert Peters. He's a teacher
at Waningen University and a PhD student at the
Institute for Philosophy at Leiden University. His research is
focused on an investigation of the philosophical and historical
roots, implicit founding. Suppositions and argumentative structure of the
concept of wilderness and its practical application in Dutch
wildlife conservation projects. And today, we're going to talk
about botanic philosophy, Alexander von Humboldt, Charles Darwin, Wilderness,
and some other related topics. So Norbert, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Well, thank you for the invitation.
So what is a botanic philosophy? And I mean,
I have to be honest here, I wouldn't have
come across it if it wasn't for my patronanick
Punter who got me in contact with your work
and then also, uh, in consequence with botanic philosophy.
Otherwise, I wouldn't even know that it existed. So
what is it?
Yeah, that's a good question. Uh, I mean, it's,
it's definitely when I get asked a lot, right?
Because botanic philosopher is quite an odd moniker to
go by, especially because philosophy usually deals with human
affairs, right? It's about maybe ethics, maybe, uh, epistemology,
maybe philosophy of science, but usually quite human centered.
Maybe from the last decades, we get a little
bit of like animal philosophy as well, animal ethics.
There's even, of course, some environmental ethics, but Um,
yeah, botanical philosophy or plant philosophy is not really
something that, that is very, that is very popular,
but I think it does, or at least I
usually try to describe it when, or comparing it
to like a a botanist or a plant scientist,
right? I'm not a botanist or a plant scientist.
I've had a little bit of training in that,
but I'm definitely not a qualified botanist. And I
think the main difference is that, you know, as
a scientist, you, you know, you're after facts, observations,
experiments. And you, you know, you test new hypotheses
and stuff like that, and this is not what
I do. But I, I do deal with, I
think something that's been noticed by multiple writers, philosophers
that Well, in, in, in science, you can, you
can do these things, right? Find new facts, new
observations, test new hypotheses, but you can also, sometimes
it happens that a new way of looking at
the facts or a new way of, yeah, of
valuing the facts, uh, sort of arises, right? Sometimes
called a paradigm or a paradigm shift. And I'm
interested in, you could say I'm sort of interested
in the paradigm shifts that occurred in the history
and in the history of humans interacting with plants.
So, How we have come to value plans and
look at plants and and and um Yeah, I
mean, but also just what a plant is, and
then you can see over time that our notion
of what a plant is, but also our own
relationship to plants and the way we look at
plants, the way we value plants has changed tremendously,
right? So, for instance, like 18, 19th century, you
see the rise of the notion of carnivorous plants,
insectivorous plants, right? Plants being able to lure, catch
and digest uh animal prey. Now that is a
very new way of looking at plants, and when
that sort of first occurs, that is a very
strange notion to botanists that there are these plants
that seem to have sort of shifted the order
of nature and where usually animals eat plants, right,
or maybe pollinate them, but. Then all of a
sudden we have plants that start eating animals. So
this really distresses a whole lot of people in
the 18, 19th century. And I'm, I'm usually quite
interested in when this shift occurs and how it's
received and how anomalies are, um, you know, sort
of being identified in the old paradigm. And and
I think it's just very interesting that that our
relationship with plants has shifted so much in recent
history.
I mean, uh, it's very interesting, and we're going
to get into some of the questions that you
explore in that discipline, but uh what a plant
is, shouldn't that be a question for the biologists
or the botanists to answer?
I, I think for the, for the most part,
yes, although I don't think that any botanist or
plant scientist is really trying to answer the question,
what is a planned, right? It's more or less
implied what a plan is. Um, BUT that the
answer to that question, and that's what I find
interesting, that that the answer to that question has
had many different answers over the centuries, and, and,
and, and these different answers are are very um.
How do you say that? Well, yeah, these, these,
these, these, these, the answers to this this question
have shaped the way we tend to view plants.
So, for instance, If we take Aristotle or Theo
Faustus, a a a a student of Aristotle who
who wrote a couple of famous books in in
botany, so we're talking ancient Greece. The plant is
a very, very different thing, right? And, and for
a long time, their view on plant has been
very dominant. So, for instance, uh, mushrooms were still
part of the plant kingdom, right? Uh, A mushroom
was a, a non-green, uh, cryptogamic plant, uh, until
20th century, middle 20th century, when we finally start
to see that the fungal kingdom is really its
own kingdom, closely related to animals than to plants.
Um, BUT also things like, I mean, The meaning
of a root, right? Um, FOR the longest time,
and we're talking millennia, people have thought that roots
were the feeding organs of plants, and that plants
really sort of ate, yeah, ground, right? Uh SOIL
together with water, and this was the nutrition of
plants, and this is to some people still a
sort of common notion a little bit. But you
have fertile ground, right? Um, AND of course, they
take some things from the ground. They take a
couple of minerals, right? They take water, and roots
take care of stability, but the root is definitely
not the feeding organ of a plant. But for
thousands of years, this has been the central dogma
in, in, in, in botany. And then sort of
19th century, we see a shift in this and
people start to discover photosynthesis, which is really something
that, well, hasn't hadn't been around for a very
long time. So I, I guess In that sense,
a philosopher maybe answers that question as well. What
is a plant? Or at least notices that throughout
the centuries, different answers have been formulated and these
answers are insightful as to what is a plant,
but also what is our relation to a plant,
and uh yeah. That's why I think.
Yeah, very interesting. So tell us about the concept
of plant blindness.
Yeah, so, um What's also interesting, and not only,
of course, we, we see plants, right? We can,
we can value plants, but it is noticeable. It's
something I noticed in my own life as well
before I started to study botany and get more
into plants and especially the sort of philosophical side
of plants, that we have a huge indifference towards
plants. And that indifference shows it shows his face
in all sorts of fields, right? So, I think
for the most part, even the plants in our
vicinity, we usually tend to walk by them without
really paying any close attention to them. We don't
necessarily pay a lot of attention to the flowering
or the seeds of plants we don't necessarily use.
Um, WE can definitely appreciate plants, we appreciate flowers,
we can appreciate a nice park. But to a
lot of people, even very basic concepts in botany
are not really part of general knowledge. Um. Usually
plants are more or less the background, right? Somewhat
neglected. Um, YOU can see it in nature documentaries
where oftentimes plants are only the background, and really
it's animal lifes, sort of the soap opera of
animal lifes that has been displayed, um, and plants
play a very minute role in that. So, so
I think, probably in everyday life as well, but
even in, even in academia, I notices as well,
there's a lot more animal scientists, right? There's a
lot of more animal science students and also in
biology, when students start to pick their specialization, oftentimes,
they do not end up, uh, focusing on the
plant kingdom. Uh, BUT also in journals, um, in
popular science books, plants get a lot less stage
time, you could say. Than animals do, and also
of course than than than humans do, but I
think, yeah. Usually, we tend to prefer animals a
bit over plants, and, and, and, and, and this
indifference is I mean, it's definitely, I, I, I
think it's very noticeable, at least, or at least
when you start to pay attention, it's quite noticeable.
For instance, right, we, we look at the illegal
trade of endangered animals, but there's very little press
attention to the illegal trade in plants. So we
know of very many uh animal species that are
near extinct or going extinct, but do we know
of one plant example, right? That, that is, that
is facing a similar problem. So I think You
can see it in, yeah, you can see it
in different ways. Now, the word itself, planned blindness,
was coined by two Americans, two American botanists, James
Woner and Elizabeth Schusler, and they were just in
academia and noticing these declining student numbers, but also
just a general lack of interest for for poor
plants. Um, PLAN journals are being valued as highly
as as animal oriented journals, etc. ETC. So they
came up with this plan that's sort of a
synonym for other words like plan neglect or zocentrism
there that were already around, but um I know,
I, I, I go back and forward with the
term. I, I, I like it in a certain
sense. I think it's sort of conjures up a
nice idea where indeed we have a sort of
indifference towards plans, but then calling it blindness. It's
a bit of a I don't know, it's, it's
a bit of a medical metaphor almost. And or
at least it, it quickly raises the question like,
what is the cure to plan blindness? And I
think that therein lies a little bit of a
problem that, oh, I'm not sure how much of
a cure there is, right? But maybe we ask
if there's a cure because we call it plan
blindness, right? Um, WHICH, which also maybe sort of
entails that we can maybe lose this a little
bit, or we can, we can open our eyes
to plants a little bit more, but um But
that might be very difficult.
And why do you think that, uh, for us,
plants are usually part of the background and we
don't pay much attention to them. Is it because
they're sort of, at least for the most part
static. I mean, They're just there. They don't move
much. So, and we have to pay attention more
to other animals because they move and particularly because,
um, our predators are all animals, or, I mean,
what's
the reason? I mean, I mean, in, in the
literature, there is a, there's a bit of a
discussion about this. Like, is this, is this a
nature thing? Is this a nurture thing, right? Is
it, are we, are we indifferent towards plants because
Many of us are city dwellers, right? We interact
with plants, but that's usually maybe aesthetic plants like
street trees or hedges or flowers we see outside
that don't really have a utility to us other
than just being aesthetically pleasing. Um, WE have a
lot of, like, plant-based food, of course, plant-based medicine,
plant-based drinks, but for the most part, I think
city life is pretty devoid of greenery or interacting
a whole lot with plants. So, Some people claim
it's an industrialized society problem, right? There we see
a lot more plant uh indifference, uh, and you
could well imagine that an agricultural society or even
like a hunter gatherer society, would have a lot
more interaction with plant life and also therefore maybe
some more knowledge. And people notice this as well,
right? If you talk to a grandfather or a
grandmother, they oftentimes have a little bit more of
a clue on different native plant species around you,
right? Um, SO it seems to be also a
little bit of a modernity problem, maybe. But then
you wouldn't feel all the way towards the nurture
side. Well, you're addressing sort of more the biological
nature side in in in the sense that Yeah,
I mean, large animals, especially, of course, big cats,
um, big carnivores, were a threat to humanity, right?
So, um, so it's definitely like we pay a
lot more attention to that danger, right, that danger
of wild animals. Now, of course, there's also some
danger to wild plants, right? Especially when you start
eating them. Um, BUT yeah, far less so. And
indeed, like you said, they, they, they are, they
appear to us very static, right? And they appear
to us to not be doing a whole lot,
to be quite passive elements in a in a.
In the environment. Yeah, so I, I don't know,
right? In a certain sense, maybe it's nurture, maybe
it's nature is is usually a question I pose
to my students as well, like, where do you
veer towards? Is it more nurture? Is it more
nature? I like to look at it. So I'm
taking this a little bit from the philosopher Ludwig
Wittgenstein, where he says, Um, in your interaction with
the world, there can be sometimes a rise of
an aspect of a thing, and he talks about
sort of this, this aspect, this sort of birth
of an aspect, and then also the, the, uh,
the, the hiding away of an aspect, or there's
the sort of, uh, losing of an aspect. So,
oftentimes he uses images like the duck rabbit, or
you have this sort of necker cube, or these
images where you can you sort of go. To
two ways of looking at it, right? Uh, WITH
the, um, the duck rabbit, right? Sometimes it appears
as a duck, sometimes it appears as a rabbit.
And he calls these aspects, and he says, sort
of like, if one aspect rises, the other one
sort of disappears. So, it's very sort of, in
a sense, it's close to the notion of paradigms.
And I think it's more Aspects lighting up, right?
So, for instance, we've been interacting with flowers for
centuries, right? We, we've grown flowers, we sold flowers,
we kept flowers in our garden, but cross pollination
and the relationship between pollinators and flowers was really
not. Seen understood until 18th, but really 19th century.
And that really gives a completely different meaning towards
a flower and what a flower actually is, and
that a flower is adapted to this pollinator, right?
And that's why it has colors, that's why it
has perfumes, pollen, nectar, all these other things. Um,
AND that's really like, I see that almost like
as an aspect, like you, because, for instance, Lina
is. He does not believe in cross pollination. He
knows of insects visiting flowers, but he thinks that
serves no function. Now, you can definitely not say
that Linnae is his plan blind, right? He is
a botanist, most famous botanist, maybe of history, and
yet he failed to see this. So what is
this failing to see? So, I think in a
certain sense you could say this blindness is also
maybe being blind to certain aspects of a plant
that arise later on in history, maybe. So, of
course, all of a sudden, when we do have
this paradigm shift in the meaning of flowers, we
all of a sudden completely understand, like, of course,
that's why a flower is shaped this way. That's
why a flower has nectar, that's why there's all
these other things. All these things seem to fall
into place. Um, SO, I, I, so I like
to use like where it says aspect and aspect
blindness. I'm not sure if I'm explaining it correctly,
but But I yeah, yeah, I think that's, that's
more um in line with the truth, I think
in a certain sense, or yeah.
Mhm. So historically, when did people start becoming more
interested in studying plants?
Yeah, so this is um This is a this
is a strange thing in the sense that Of
course, we've been interested in plants for a very
long time. So in our evolutionary history, plants play
a vital important, like a vital role. Now we
know of many of the other great apes that
are still there that they hold quite a lot
of plant knowledge, right? A gorilla, chimpanzee, and orangutan
are very capable of making distinctions between multiple plants,
right? They have plants that they eat from, they
have even plants that use medicinally. So, I think
in a certain sense, Primates have a a good
grasp of plants in their surroundings most of the
time, and of course, When humans are hunter gatherers,
plants play in a very vital role in in
survival. But then, of course, with, with farming, agriculture,
The relationship with plants becomes a lot stronger, I
think. But then it still takes an awful long
time before they are really like an object of
uh investigation, more or less. So, of course, in
classical times, in, in Greece, you find Some botanical
works, right? I already named Theo Frosti, he wrote
two, or from him we have two books on
plants, um, which were quite influential and in classical
times you, you will find some books and plants,
but for the most part, this, yeah, for the
most part this deals with plants that are very
useful to human beings, especially plants that have medicinal
properties, and for, I think in the early days.
When we see botany as a science arise, it's
really a sort of sister sense of medicine and,
and, uh, yeah, health, right? So, so the apothecary
is really a garden and we take medicinal plants
from the garden and we use this to, to
heal ourselves. So the interest is very anthropocentric, you
could say, right? It's, it's really what does the
plant mean for our survival and, and, and the
plants that are important are those plants that are
important to our survival. Now, in, in modernity, and
this is sort of a little bit strange is
that we do find that botany is one of
the first natural sciences, you could say to enter
modernity. So, early modernity, we see, so 16, 17th
century, but 16th century, we see. Several modern herbals,
you could say, right? So, a herbal is, is
really, again, a book that is used by a
doctor or an apothecary to find the medicinal properties
of certain plants, but these herbals become a lot
more extensive, and also a lot more There's a
lot more scientific rigor to it. So, you get
certain, like people like Leonard Fuchs, uh, Hieronymus Bo,
um Otto Bruenfels, these are like early botanists that
write these sort of modern herbals that seem, well,
that are a lot more intelligible to us, right?
When we read them, you, you can already see
that they are. Ordering plants in a, in a
sort of familiar way to us. So to put
the grasses together, for instance, and earlier herbals, you
could just find maybe an alphabetic order of plants,
right? Or a different order of plants, but In
these modern herbals, we find a lot more information.
We also find information on where they grow, we
find some interesting attributes, maybe, a, a clear description
of the parts of the plants. So this really
rises maybe, yeah, early modernity. But like, real experimental.
Uh, uh, uh, PLANT science is really a late
child, right? So a late bloomer, so we're talking
18th century, but really 18, 19th century, we really
see the plant, you know, entering sort of the
laboratory and being experimented on a lot more heavily.
But that takes an awful long time. Yeah.
So, in modernity, what was the effect of the
romanticists on our view of the natural world? What
role did they play?
So, so the, I think the romantic period, or
So this is a recent, or not recent discovery
I made, but This is something that I, I
find very interesting. I'm not sure if it's completely
holds true, but You can see in the romantic
period, we see, of course, a little bit of
a critique on enlightenment, we see Um, also critique
on the way science is being professed in enlightenment,
and one of the critiques that comes forth when
it comes to botany is, is being addressed by
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, the, the French philosopher, but also a
bit of an amateur botanist himself, and In one
of his final books, He sort of, he has
all these walks, and he talks a lot about
botany there, and he notices that in his day,
18th century, we see that plants are still part
mainly of herbals. And he sort of addresses this
problem of, yeah, we only seem to find plants
interesting for as far as they help us survive,
right? Or as far as they're useful to us.
So we don't really look at a plant, we
immediately pluck it out of the ground, we start
to ground it up, and we start to make
medicine out of it. And he says, do we
not What do we lose then, right? He's sort
of almost calling for a botany for botany's sake.
Don't you find plants interesting in and of themselves?
And should we not be interested in plant life,
maybe regardless of human life. Now, this is always
a little bit of an idealistic step because can
you really say that botany after that is is
becoming a science that's really detached from? Utility, profits,
anthropocentrism, not really, but it is somewhat curious that
after so, you do find that, for instance, mosses
get a lot closer attention, right? Or ferns, or
plants that usually do not foster a whole lot
of attention because they're not very useful to us.
You know, think of all the different moss species.
How many of these species do we use? Not
a whole lot, but we do find Detailed microscopic
studies of mosses all of a sudden, right? We
find people being interested in how do they fertilize,
how does their sex life work? How do they,
uh, how's does their ecology work? And it's not
just true for mosses, but also for, you know,
many other plants that usually do not foster a
whole lot of interest. So we see a sort
of in this romantic period, we see a little
bit of this notion of science that science should
be for science's sake, and botany should also be
for botany's sake, and that Almost the best thing
you can be as an amateur botanist, right? Somebody
who doesn't have a A stake in it, or
no monetary, like, uh, how do you say advantage,
but really just studies plants because he's very interested
in plants. And, um, in that sense, I think,
yeah, I think there is some influence from the
Romantic period, and we do find a little bit
of this. Yeah, this this interest for plants in
and of themselves because they're interesting themselves. And I
think this is still something that we, that is
still a very popular stance nowadays, right? I mean,
also nowadays is, you know, many parts of botany
are not human oriented or are not are not
dealing with utilization of plants, but are, but are
just because we're interested in the ecology of plants,
we're in the physiology of plants, etc. Yeah.
Right. So one major, major figure here is Alexander
von Humboldt. So I, I would imagine that most
people would at least heard of him, but if
not, uh, tell us about him, uh, I mean,
who was he, tell us about perhaps some of
his main contributions and achievements, particularly when it comes
to the study of plants.
Yeah, so Alexander von Humboldt is maybe not your
usual character to discuss when you talk about the
history of botany. Um, SO like I said, experimental
botany arises in the 18th century, people like Stephen
Hills, uh, we see. Um, PEOPLE looking at plants
under microscopes, we see sort of first fertilization experiments
with flowers and people establishing that plants are sexual
organisms and that fertilization and pollination is important, not
yet cross pollination, but, but they at least know
that there's pollination occurring, right? Um. But then Alexander
von Humboldt is a strange character in this because
he's not really seen as a botanist or discussed
as a botanist. And in a certain sense, he's
a home universalist, right? A polymath. He does many
different things in science, and throughout his life, we
can see this, right? He has a geology interest,
uh, volcanoes, he's very interested in, you know, weather,
pre precipitation, ocean currents, all these different. All these
different fields, but also animal electricity, um, and then
plants, I think, play a far more important role
in his life than usually is admitted by biographers
or people that write about his life. So, I
think especially nowadays, he's a bit of a more
well-known character, especially because of the biography uh by
Andrea Wolff, the inventor or the invention of nature.
I think this Place him a little bit more
at the forefront again, right? Uh, AS, as a
very important scientist, and she sort of sees him
as an early climate scientist or discusses him in,
in this fashion. And then you can, you can,
you can make a case for that. I don't
think it's a very strong case, but you could
make a case for that. But I think we're
also this polymath thing when it comes to Alessandro
von Humboldt is also a bit in the way
of Seeing what his focus really is, especially when
he's traveling. So, I think Alexander van Humboldt is
most well known for his travel to South America
and North America. So this is, you know, uh
late 18th century, early 19th century, right? We, he
travels for 5 years to get rid a friend
of his, um Bolon, who was a botanist. Um,
HE travels to South America, North America, and, you
know, he I mean, again, he does many things
here, right? He studies many things. He studies people,
culture, uh, art, but also a lot of nature,
right? AND a lot of, and a lot of
different subjects. But you can see in his travel
very early on, even when he, you know, he
makes a stopover in Tenerife, which was common that
day, right? You stopped to go to, uh, South
America, you stopped in Tenerife, and then immediately there
you can see that he has a different project
in mind. He, when he's climbing the volcano in
Tenerife, the Altaira. He starts to make a lot
of notes on the different vegetation layers on that
volcano, and to see sort of how are they
characterized? What are the main vegetation types you would
find, right? So, near the base, he finds uh
a lot of banana plants being grown, sugar cane
being grown, you know, subtropical tropical plants. And of
course, moving up that mountain, you could find um
the laurel forests. And higher up, you find a
sort of pine forest, and even higher up, you
know, you go past the tree line, and it
comes to shrubs and and alpine plants, and then
you reach the sort of, you reach the top.
And he sees a sort of An order in
these, in these different types of vegetation layers. And
when he goes to South America and he travels
the Andes, and he climbs many of the, the
volcanoes and mountains in Ecuador, but also Mexico, he's
starting to notice that this is not just occurring
in Tenerife, this is actually occurring in South America
on these mountains too. You see the same sort
of order and what he's really interested in is
Trying to determine what really determines where a plant
grows, right? It's almost this He's coming from a
time when People like Linnaeus and other people are
saying, well, the plants have their place because we,
well, we have a creation, we have maybe a
Garden of Eden, and then either the plants dispersed
from the Garden of Eden, or some people think,
no, God just places the different species in different
places. And Humbel is dissatisfied with this this idea,
right? Because he sees a sort of order, but
it seems strange to say that God has placed
all these different plants only in different locations. He's
far more of the idea that, no, it's more
the elements more or less, the surrounding the environment
of a plant that dictates what can grow there
and whatnot, right? So we know what cactus can
grow in desert, you know, a conifer tree usually
goes in a a boreal forest. Now, he As
he's scaling these mountains, he's making a lot of,
he's taking a lot of instruments with them, and
making a lot of notes and observations on temperature,
on the boiling point of water, the blueness of
the sky, the geology, animals, etc. ETC. ETC. RIGHT?
He, he gathers all this information, basically to say,
OK, if we know that a certain plant grows
here, maybe it's because of these environmental conditions that
it can grow there. And this is this will
become highly important, like 19th century when we really
see large movements of plants, you know, uh, from
colony to colony, basically, right? People take the vanilla
orchid from the middle of America, all the way
to Indonesia. People steal the rubber seeds of the
rubber tree in Brazil, they take it to England,
and they take it to Singapore. We see all
these movement of plants, and I think in a
certain sense, this plant geography. Alexander von Humboldt puts
on the map, becomes really instrumental in finding out
where can we grow certain plants in certain places.
So the British Empire's thinking, now, do we have
the climate conditions, the environmental conditions, similar to the
ones in Brazil where we see this rubber tree
growing? Because if we have those conditions, we can
take seeds there, and we might be able to,
yeah, grow it in a completely different place. Now
this has happened for centuries that people have moved
plants around, but, but it becomes a lot more
conscious after Humboldt. So we see a lot more
people thinking about, OK, where can we place these
different plants, and this becomes highly important in, you
know, industrial revolution and and uh basically colonial, the
colonial period. So that's very short. I mean, there's
a lot to say about Arkander von Humboldt. I
didn't really touch on his like life or biography,
but I think it's It's of the highest importance
that we see him as a plant geographer first,
right? That, that this is really what's the focus
of his journey, but also the focus of this
sort of research that he's trying to do. He's
trying to figure out why do plants grow in
certain places. And I think that's still, you know,
that's still to this day a question that that
um requires research.
Interesting. So another figure that we don't tend to
think about as a botanist is Charles Darwin. I
mean, we usually associated him with the pigeons and
uh things like that. But in what ways was
he a botanist as well?
Yeah, so I think in the case of Charles
Darwin, you could because with Alexander von Humboldt, you
can really see, he's writing all these different types
of books, right, that deal with very different subjects,
and this is true for Darwin, of course, as
well, but with Darwin, you can really say that
he Well, at least his botanical work is of
the highest importance when it comes to. His career,
so. I mean, he's somewhat of a curious figure
in in in the history of science that we
know oftentimes a little bit more about him than
we know about others, right? We, we know of
the, the, the kite of Benjamin Franklin, or we
know of the the bathtub and Archimedes, but with
Darwin, usually people can say like Galapagos Islands, finches,
like you said, pigeons, right? Evolutionary theory. We also,
we seem to know a little bit of the
facts of his life. But I think some of
the facts get a lot more attention than than.
If you take a look at his life and
what he does. So, About 1/3 of everything he
writes is about botany, and even his major books,
Origin of Species, uh, or his major book, The
Origin of Species, talks a lot about, uh, plants
and animals, right? And And it's interesting to see
that botany really plays a very important role very
early on. Now, again, he's similar to von Humboldt,
he's interested in geology, he's interested in animals, but
plants seem to play a lot more of an
important role than we usually admit. Um. So, this
really starts, most of it is, most of this
starts after his journey with the Beagle. So, I
would argue that the far more interesting side of
Darwin's life is not so much the beagle travels,
even though, of course, you know, he goes to
all these far flung flung places and finds all
these interesting animals and plants and and geology. But
I think his life in Kent in downhouse, settling
down, is far more interesting scientifically because there he
really starts to experiment, and I think One of
his strong suits is that he's a very strong
experimenter, right? He thinks of all these usually very
simple experiments. So, for instance, Nobody's ever looked at
the vitality of seeds after being exposed to seawater.
Now, you could say, that's quite important, right, to
have a look at, and nobody really did. They
just sort of assumed that either seawater was gonna
kill seeds, or that seeds would survive in seawater
for some time. But nobody had a look, nobody
experimented. So he's taking All these little pots, filling
them with water, adding a certain amount of salt,
and then adding seeds to them, and just seeing
how long can they withstand, uh, salt water. Because
salt is usually quite detrimental to planned life. Now,
this very simple experiment, and then he writes about
it in the Garda's Chronicle, he gives some, you
know, his experimental details, and he asks other people,
can you also experiment, or do other people have
any, you know, uh, experience with this, uh, type
of experimentation? And then he finds out, some seeds
are indeed quite capable of floating on saltwater for
weeks on end. Now, if you then take, you
know, certain ocean currents, you could well establish this
idea of long distance dispersal, right? So, you can
start to answer questions like, well, how did the
plants end up at the Galapagos? If we know
that the Galapagos Islands arose from the sea floor
by volcanic activity. So, basically they came out of
this the ocean as a sort of blank slate.
How were they filled? And then with these simple
experiments, he's trying to explain, oh, you know, we
can see, um, seeds can can disperse themselves by
seawater for quite a long time. So this maybe
explains partially why we find vegetation on the Galapagos.
Uh. So it's, so he's a really strong experimenter,
and he starts to really write a whole lot
about Uh, uh, different botanical subjects. But in that
sense, he's, because he's looking at plants from maybe
more of an evolutionary perspective, he's starting to really
reevaluate, reevaluate plant life and really for the maybe
for the first, as one of the first seeing
the real complexity of plant life, or at least
not trying to, yeah, sort of noticing that plants
are a lot more complex than we oftentimes uh
uh grant them, yeah.
So what were the major ideas that influenced how
we view the natural world and where did they
come from?
Yeah, so this is something that, and that's why
I wrote my first book on on uh on
Charles Darwin's botanical studies, because It it it it
is strange to me that there, there was one
book before, and now there is a little bit
more, but there was one book before, I think
in the 70s, uh about Darwin's botany, but I
think he's such a revolutionary character, so very early
on, so after The Origin of Species. He starts,
he starts, well, a couple of lines of experimentation,
and a couple of lines of experimentation in different
subjects. So he starts with the fertilization of orchids.
So he's already started this work a little bit
when he's writing The Origin of Species, but it's
very clear that in the fertilization of orchids, he
wants to show that orchid flowers have all these
different adaptations to ensure cross pollination. And this is
really a first in his day. So people thought
flowers were not all that important. We know from
the names that they were that they were important
in fertilization, and they grow seeds, but there was
no notion of cross pollination yet. So he starts
to see that, or starts to experiment with orchid
flowers and showing that they have all these different
adaptations to ensure cross pollination, and that they're very
well fitted to certain types of pollinators, that certain
types of pollinators can pollinate a flower and others
can definitely not. So, He's starting to become more
and more interested in fertilization of flowers, and he
really starts to give experimental evidence for that cross
pollination is of the highest importance in the feral
kingdom. So this is really his sort of first
line of interest, and he does a lot of
fertilization experiments. So he's really, you know, he has
all these flower beds, and he's really crawling through
them with his pencil, trying to fertilize all these
different flowers to establish what is more important, self-fertilization
or cross-fertilization, but also looking at how are all
these different flowers adapted to all these different pollinators.
Um, MORE physiological. Theme is when he goes into
the question of carnivorous plants. So, he's really the
first to have experimental evidence of how, and but
also answering the question why plants take on this
peculiar habit of luring in insects and devouring them,
right? So, In England, he, he's he's taking notice
of a couple of plants that have been said
to be carnivorous, like a sundew, all these different
plants, but also, of course, abroad, we find a
lot more carnivorous plants, and he's experimenting with these
plants a whole lot. Now, He's experimenting with them
because he has good friends at Kew Gardens, right?
His best friend is the director, Joseph Hooker, so
he gets a lot of plants from there, and
he has his own little greenhouse, which is still
there. So in this greenhouse, he's growing all these
different plants, and he's experimenting, for instance, with sundews
to see to what do sundews react, right? Cause
the sundew is like a leaf with tentacles on
it, with a little bit of, almost glue on
it. And you can see in the wild that,
you know, a lot of insects sort of, you
know, are lured to this, to these leaves. They're
caught up in these tentacles, and then these tentacles
seem to close or these leaves seem to close
around these insects, and then they open up again,
and then the insect is disappeared, right? Um, SO
he's testing to what do they react, and, um,
you know, what the different substances. So he, you
know, he he puts a little bit of tea
on them, a little bit of urine, a hair,
glass, stones, all these different things, finding out that
they only seem to respond to to material that
has very high nitrogen content. And then he starts
to think like, OK, this may be explaining something,
because, of course, these plants are curing nitrogen poorer,
you know, phosphorus poor surroundings. So, where there's very
little concentration of these minerals in the soil, like
a marsh, or, you know, mountainous range, and you're
starting to see that these plants are actually adapted
to living in these sort of poor nutrient environments,
and that they have become adapted to catching their
own sort of nutrients. So, not only showing how
this um digestion works and how they catch these
different insects, and how complex these, these, these traps
are, but also showing, OK, but then why? Why
did they do this, right? Why do we find
this adaptation? And then from there on, he's sort
of not necessarily from there on, not growing very
chronologically, but he also writes on climbing plants. He
writes one of the first studies to show what
different habits and movements climbing plants show. And from
there, we really get his, like his most famous
and also last botanical book, which is, um, about
the power of movement in plants, which talks a
lot about plant movement, and he's sort of the
first one to show what we now know from
EPs images that Actually, all plans move. It's not
so much that they're, they appear passive to us,
but they're not passive themselves, right? And not just
that, he's not just showing that plants move, but
he's also showing that plants experience their surroundings, that
they're able to react to light, to gravity, to
moisture, to all these different environmental cues. Plants seem
to react, even though they lack clear sense organs.
So, he's really starting to view the plant as
a Moving, spontaneously moving, interacting with its surroundings, and
sort of experiencing this world. Um, YEAH, you're starting
to look, yeah, very differently at plants. So he's
one of the first ones, for instance, to show
that roots follow the center of gravity. And also
locates what actually in the root is sort of
causing this, right? He finds out that the root
tip indeed seems to sense the center of gravity,
and, uh, and, and sort of sense chemical messengers
up the root to make sure that it sort
of bends in the right way. Um. I mean,
there's a lot of unanswered questions to him still,
but you can really see, and he also writes
this in his autobiography, that he, it's really been
his sort of purpose to to re-evaluate plants, to
to to show that they are highly organized beings,
and that they have their own evolutionary history.
Yeah. But I mean, we've talked about the romanticists,
Alexander von Humboldt, Charles Darwin. When it comes to
how we view the natural world, what would you
say are the main ideas that influence it?
The main ideas that influence Darwin, you mean, or
now how we view the natural world.
Well, I think we're coming to terms with these
discoveries that Darwin made in the 19th century. That,
I mean, for a lot of people cross pollination
and the relationship between insects and flowers or and
other animals that act as pollinators, it's it's quite
apparent, right? Many people know this. To be true,
and we know that. So, so this is something
that Darwin popularized. It was not necessarily him that
he didn't really necessarily discover cross pollination. It was
discovered in the 18th century, but he really was
the first one to experiment with it, to show
proof of it, and, and also to make it
more popular. So, I think in, in a certain
sense, we've come to terms with that, right? And
we also know of carnivorous plants, right? So, In
in in a certain sense, he's definitely shaping the
way we view plants nowadays, but there's also a
lot of Things he discovered that aren't really necessarily
known all that widely. So, I don't think a
lot of people realize that a root is also
a sort of sensory organ, or at least a
root tipus, that reacts to all these different environmental
cues, right? And that all these root tips, and,
you know, uh, a mature plant can have, well,
thousands of them. And all these different individual root
tips are indeed sort of sensing their surroundings and
navigating through the soil, right? I don't think people
usually tend to look at plants that actively, that
sort of intentionally, um. But also seeing plants as
a sort of sensory organism that has this complex
interaction with its environment, and I think that's, we're
still sort of coming to terms with that. So,
in a certain sense, I think he's deeply influenced
the way we are viewing viewing plants, but we're
also, it's not, not all of it is has
landed yet. But then more in general, the natural
world, I Um, I think, well. What, for instance,
very interesting is that the, the metaphor he chooses
to describe life. BECOMES radically different from the metaphor
people used to use to describe life. So, the
chain of being, or the ladder of nature, was
really the dominant metaphor for thinking about nature right
up until Darwin, and Darwin even still uses it
quite a lot, right? Talks about higher animals, lower
animals. So he, he uses this still, this, this
hierarchical thinking. So this stems from Aristotle, the ancient
Greeks, basically, but it's, it's very dominant right up
until the 19th century, where it's really seen as
though plants are like a step below animals, right?
And then stones and minerals are a step below
plants, and then above plants we have animals, human
beings, and maybe if you're Christian, an angel, god,
etc. But this, this latter, like, Viewing of the
natural world is, of course, well, it, it, it
really Stresses this point that this plan, that plants
are sort of passive, uninteresting organisms because they're lower
on the scale of being, right? Or they're lower
in this chain of being. Um, AND I think
Darwin with the metaphor of the tree, the tree
of life, and the and the same metaphor occurs
to Alfred Wallace when he is in Tenata, right?
They're, they're both thinking of the same metaphor at
the same time, that in fact, we should, we
should look at affinities between different species as a
tree-like, uh, in a sort of tree-like diagram. And
I think this is Well, again, right, nowadays super
super influential that we take this sort of botanical
metaphor, this, this tree-like metaphor of life, and that
we view life in in in in uh through
this lens. And and and I don't think we
Well, we fully appreciate how important that is, right?
That we take a non-hierarchical view of our surroundings,
right? Because that immediately undermines the idea that we
are somehow better than plants. No, we've all survived,
right? Plants are here, so they have what's necessary
to survive for all these millions of years, and
we are here as well. And there's really no
measure by which you can say we are better
than uh plants or other life forms. So I
think in this evolutionary approach, Darwin is really Um,
It sort of sets Darwin up to really start
to approve differently appreciate plants. But it's interesting that
he does this through this sort of different metaphor,
that he uses this botanical metaphor to make sense
of the plant world, and to sort of see
if we can um Get rid of this, these
presuppositions, these assumptions about plants being passive, uninteresting, simple
creatures.
So, now let me ask you a question about
related to a topic that I think you personally
are very interested in. What is wilderness?
Yeah, so this is completely different indeed completely different
topic, or we're sort of leaving the planned world
a little bit behind then. Um, SO this is
something that in recent years have become more and
more interested in. In that, um, And this was
also, like you said in begin mentioned at the
beginning. So it used to be my PhD project.
I've, I've, I've, I've switched topics, but this used
to be my PhD project. To look into wilderness
and the wilderness notion, and especially the influence of
the romantic era, and, and the, uh uh maybe
especially American romanticism in the way we view wilderness
nowadays. So, it's been noted. Especially by uh the
Chicago School in Environmental History, that like people like
William Cronin, but also maybe later on, like Bart
Callicott, uh, Emma Marris, people that have critiqued our
view or our notion of wilderness, that for a
very long time, and I mean, still to this
day, we we tend to think of wilderness as
this. Yeah, we tend to take this dualistic approach
to our surroundings, where the city is really like
the human dominated landscape, the least wild, you could
say, and then on the on the opposite end,
you find wilderness, the space where humans are least
dominant, where we find very little influence of humans,
and where we find sort of this idea of
sort of pristine nature of nature unadulterated by human
beings, untouched by human beings. And I think Especially
in America, I mean I think for good reasons,
uh, this idea has been critiqued that this notion
of wilderness is somewhat more common to a myth
or a cultural idea that perhaps has served its
has served its purpose, right? Or at least, um,
how do you say, it's sort of out of
touch, um. Uh, ESPECIALLY on the knowledge we now
have of these places we used to call wildernesses,
right? Like North America, or like the Amazon. We
now know that many of these places were not
only heavily populated, but also heavily managed by the
people that live there, right? And that, um, There
was definitely management of the natural environment, and there
was, well, even agriculture, of course, we know, right,
and Huper animals and all these different um So
that that that's notion of of wilderness or seeing
places as being wilderness is definitely a little bit
outdated. Yeah, but it's a, yeah, so you go
ahead. Sorry, I'm talking,
no, no, no, no, you're not talking too much
at all. So, uh, but, uh, I mean that's
about wilderness, but what is rewilding them.
Well, I think, well, before maybe we reach rewilding,
it's so, like I said, it's in the in
the romantic period where we find We find a
sort of Re-evaluation of what wilderness is. So, um,
I think, you know, when does the notion of
wilderness come about? And I think we could trace
that back to the origin of something else, which
is sort of the opposite also, similar to the
city, and opposite of the wilderness, which is the
garden, right? I think we get wilderness or this
notion of wilderness as soon as we start to
Garden the plot of land, because then that distinction
becomes interesting because the garden needs to be protected
from the wilderness, right? We don't want wild animals
in the garden eating the plants. We don't want
other plants supplanting the, the crops we have, we,
we cherish. So I think in a certain sense
you could say with the rise of agriculture, you
get this notion of, you know, the wilderness, uh,
outside, and then cultural landscape is more the garden,
the agricultural field. The city. Um, AND in a
certain sense, you could say, the wilderness. Before the
Romantic period is seen as a negative place, as
a place of horror, of fear, of danger, and
of course, this is how we know wilderness partially,
right? Uh WE appreciate it, but we also know
that there's dangers involved. And I think it's even
if you look at, like, for instance, Paradise Lost.
So when Milton describes Paradise and Paradise Lost, it's,
it's the Garden of Eden that's surrounded by wilderness,
and this wilderness is impenetrable, right? And it's sort
of like when the people are expelled from the
garden, they enter the wilderness, and they have to
make their own gardens again. And they have to
slave and toil in these gardens to, to supplant
the wilderness. And you see really in, in, in
the biblical notion that the wilderness is the place
of temptation, it's the place of the devil, right?
And we should bring civilization to wilderness, you know,
it's sort of this notion of, you can find
this in one of the Bible books. I'm not
very fluent, but it's sort of like, make the
desert bloom like a rose, right? Make and the
desert is a word for wilderness, right? So it's
make the wilderness bloom like a rose. So it's
really this. TASK of humanity to supplant the wilderness
and to make civilize uh to, to, to create
civilization. And I think In romantic periods, we see
a sort of switch in this evaluation of the
wilderness, where all of a sudden, we start to
become very critical of gardens, agriculture, cities. And we
start to become very positive about wilderness, wild beasts,
right? Wolves, forests, waterfalls, and these start to become
places where we go to, and they start to
become even a little bit touristic in the sense
that, you know, they attract tourism, and people start
to see sort of the beauty of wilderness, where
before the wilderness was really seen as a dangerous
place, a place that you did not really aesthetically
appreciate. It, it, it turns into this place that
has a lot of appreciation, right? And And we
start to really appreciate this wilderness. And I think
this re-evaluation is very important in a romantic period,
but it leaves the dichotomy, the dualism alive, right?
It, it just changes places and it's ways, it's,
it's valued. So, What happened sort of in the,
well, last century in this century, that people are
starting to critique this dualism that, for instance, people
start to call the city wild as well, right?
It's sort of like if you listen to hip
hop, it's, it's about the city being a jungle,
right? It's about, um, there's a wilderness to the
to the city. And then there's also a sort
of artificiality oftentimes we think to wilderness, where a
lot of national parks are very managed, right? The
way we take care of pollution, we have all
these rules, so they're almost as if it's a
garden, right? So, I think in modernity or in
modern days, we are sort of in this sort
of post-structuralist era where we don't really see it
as a very strict dualism anymore. So we see
that wilderness is a little bit on the side
of civilization, and civilization and Human influence is a
little bit on the side of wilderness, right? Also,
where on earth is their pristine wilderness, right? Human
beings have influenced pretty much about. Everything, not, not,
I mean, this much. I mean, we're not changing
Mount Everest, but we're definitely polluting Mount Everest, polluting,
you know, Mount Everest is cannot be seen as
a pristine wilderness anymore. So, I guess, you know,
we're in a time where people are really critiquing
this notion of wilderness, and, and, and, but we
also have this trend, rewilding, and that is very
strange, because rewilding is sort of built on this
old notion of wilderness. So, it appreciates wilderness, it
sort of has this romantic idea of wilderness, and
it tries to reestablish this pristine nature. So, The
idea is that you take a plot of land
that used to be cultivated by humans, and you
leave it, you implement some changes to make sure
that there is a sort of uh ecosystem surfaces
are up, right, and everything is in place, and
then you leave it alone, right? And then you
rewild, right? It's sort of like making something, yeah,
yeah, making something wild again, right? If we can
use the sort of Trumpian approach. Um. And this
was very popular, especially in the Netherlands. We see
very early rewilding projects here in the Netherlands. For
instance, Oslosses is, sort of known as one of
the first rewilding projects. So this was a plot
of land as well. There was Basically boarded off
from humans, not ecologists, but humans. You can go
on safari there, and they've introduced quite a lot
of big grazers, right? So they introduced deer, uh,
cattle, um, to, in order to rewild this place.
But I think And and maybe from my assessment,
you can sort of already hear that. I'm quite
critical of this notion, because I think it really
leans on this old notion of wilderness as a
Landscape that is free of human influence, and that
is just let, you know, left to its own
devices, basically. And I, I, I'm highly critical of
uh this notion. Yeah.
Yeah, but I mean, do you think that uh
ideas of rewilding, connect in any way or linked
to environmentalism in any way?
Well, I think it's seen as this. So for
instance, Rousseau says, right, everything that comes out of
the hands of the creator is good. And everything
degenerates in the hands of man. And I think
this is sort of central to this rewilding notion
that for some reason we've become very dominant on
Earth. We're we're in this so-called Anthropocene, right? Where
we are a very important factor, um. Uh, IN
the environment, and I think this is sort of
like a It's a reaction to that, right? It's
a reaction to our dominance and the fact that
we have this sort of little bit of a
planetary control, right? There's the planetary trade, there's, well,
you know, there's international trade, there's international tourism, there's
we, we definitely span the planet in, in, in
one form or another. And I think this is,
this rewilding is a reaction, but it's a very
Um, I think in most cases it it's a
it's a it's it's based on this, I think,
outdated notion of what wilderness is. I don't think
that there's no wilderness, it's just that as long
as you view wilderness as this place that is
untouched by humans, and that is somehow Devoid of
human influence, then, well, first off, we have no
wilderness because there's no such place on earth, but
also, should this really be the idealistic situation you
want to steer towards? And also, Yeah, I mean,
rewilding sort of implies that you want to go
back to a certain place in time, right? Usually
before human dominance. But, but, but how do you
select where to go back to, right? Where to
stop, um, why are we still, well, we're calling,
we're calling it rewilding, but we're doing a whole
lot of management, right? These places are not unmanaged.
There's a lot of human influence. You could even
say, well, there's, there's a ton of human influence,
right? We introduce animals, right? We, I mean, and
we use all sorts of reasonings for this, right?
We say, well, We're missing very important ecosystem surfaces,
if we don't have a large grazer, we don't
have a large carnivore in place. So, to have
a rewilded really rewilded environment. We need to bring
back these predators too, and we need to bring
back these herbivores, you know, and, and animals that
in the past we've we've hunted to extinction. We
need to bring them back so we can have
this sort of idealistic wilderness. And I, I find
it to be troublesome. Really all the ways I
look at it, is that, yeah, yeah.
And what is the difference between being native and
being exotic? What, I mean, what's the difference there?
Also this plays into a little bit to this
rewilding. So, of course, one of the things also
done in rewilding is looking at, so what do
you want to recreate, right? Do you want to
recreate a certain wilderness that was maybe there in
the past, but humans have since influenced the landscape
that much that many of these animals and plants
have disappeared. Now, rewilding also means you want to
have native animals and plants in place, right? Cause
you want to have a sort of wilderness. So,
what's also done in rewilding is that usually we
try to take out all the different exotic plants
that are there as well. So it's, so it's
also this brings forward this notion of, you know,
only having yeah, only having native plants, only having
native animals. And of course, if we look at
our surroundings, this is not what we find at
all. We, well, not only do we cultivate many
exotic plants, but of course, also in the wild,
you find many plants that, you know, were introduced
in the past by human beings, sometimes willingly, sometimes
unknowingly. And, um, you know, if you go outside,
you can find plants from, from North America. I'm
talking here in the Netherlands, right? But you can
find plants from North America, you can find plants
from Argentina, uh, in the wild, right? Doing quite
well. Um, SO, I think because We have international
trade, because we have tourism, because we're transporting people
and goods across the planet. We've also, you know,
uh, um, yeah, we've also taken on board many
a plant and animal, and and some of these
plants and animals have done quite well in these
new surroundings. So just to make a little bit
of a bridge between rewilding and native and exotic.
Now, Um, of course, so this is what my
PhD project is, is, is really about, is this
sort of this. The philosophical roots and roots of
this. Distinction between native and exotic. When do people,
not necessarily when do the first exotics arrive in
Europe or elsewhere, but more when do people start
to realize that some plants hitch hitch a ride,
right? That some plants are transported by human beings
and start to become wild and really uh survive
in this other in these other surroundings. And I,
I found that this was really a question that
wasn't answered yet. People sort of assumed that in
the 19th century, it started to occur to people
that you had these different types of exotic plants
that were somehow introduced by human beings, but I
found that already as early as the 18th century,
and even before that, people are noticing that sometimes
exotic plants appear in in in their surroundings.
OK, so it's still linked to the difference between
being a native and being exotic when it comes
to exotic or non-native species. What is an invasive
species?
So this is, so to nowadays there's, I think
in almost every country, there is quite a lot
of talk about invasive species. Also, the IPBS has
has said that uh uh invasive exotic species is
one of the #1, it's like in the top
five threats to uh biodiversity. You know, uh, other
than land use and pollution and all these other
types of things, invasive exotics are also causing the
disappearance of many native species. So they're definitely seen
as a, as a sort of global, one of
the global issues we face nowadays. Now, like I
said, I, I'm interested in. When do we start
to notice this distinction between native and exotic? And
I think this really has to do with a
rise in, so I said, like, Alexander von Humboldt
is one of the first planned geographers. That's not.
Entirely true. Before him we see a botanical topography.
So for instance, Linnaeus, but also other people have
already Started to pay attention to what plants can
we find in certain regions. And we see in
the 17 18th century the rise of the so-called
flora. And the flora is really a book that
showcases all the wild flora you can find in
a certain region. And by mapping out what species
you can find, Now, in this mapping, this is
where we start to notice that there are exotics
slipping in as well. So Linaus looks at, for
instance, at different floras that were written in a
certain century, and he sees that there's new additions
in the new flora. And sometimes these new additions,
of course, are just a scientist paying more attention,
right? Or looking more closely at what grows in
a certain region. But there's also new additions. They're
definitely not the product of being overlooked. They seem
to be plants that have been introduced and have
gone wild in a certain sense. So, with the
rise of floras and the rise of this botanical
topography, people start to notice, hey, there's exotics coming
in. And then Linnaeus is one of the first
ones to sort of, uh, how do you say?
Syatize that or categorize that, and he writes a
short uh uh uh text on all the different
plants and in recent history have entered Europe and
Sweden by by means of humans, but also by
natural means. And he sees this as a very
positive thing. So he likes these new additions to
Swedish nature and European nature, and he, it sort
of heals them as, you know, the more successful
the better, right? If you are successful as an
exotic plant, you get what he says, you get,
uh, sort of like a city rights, right, or,
uh, you get sort of, um, yeah we say
in Dutch Burge but a civil rights, you get
sort of civil rights. So if you're very successful,
you could become part, you naturalize into the environment.
So, you become part of the Swedish nature, or
part of European nature. So, he's very positive. And
then, It becomes invasive when we go to Darwin.
So when Darwin travels with the Beagle, travels South
America. He finds in Argentina and in Paraguay, when
he's walking through the Pampas, he finds that There
is a certain garden plant that it was introduced
by the Spanish that has gone wild and is
making whole populations in the pompas. And this is
a cardoon, this is a a type of artichoke
uh species, and this is a very, this plant
does very well. And then he writes, I don't
think there's a single case of an alien plant
invading. On a territory and causing this sort of
extinction of aboriginal species. And this is really the
first time that we find this word invade in
connection to plants. So, of course, we knew of
human beings invading, but plants invading, animals invading is
really a sort of evolutionary notion. So, it, it
really, it's sort of a militaristic metaphor that describes
or Makes us understand, like, what is actually happening.
So, it's not like Linnaeus said it's a perfect
addition to nature. No, Darwin is seeing that, no,
the success of this newcomer is actually detrimental to
the native species that are there. And then he
uses this word invasive. Now, I think from there
we get our idea, right, of when certain plants
are very successful and they come from abroad, they've
been introduced by human beings, so they're exotic in
that sense. And when they're very successful, we call
them invasive because, well, they take the place of
native plants that were, that used to grow there.
But that would make you think that Darwin was
very negative on on that notion. But in a
certain sense you could say that introducing this term
invasion is for him only also a way of
describing how plants migrate, and that Not necessarily saying
it's a bad thing, it's more like this is
what happens in nature, right? Also without human beings,
we see this long distance uh dispersal of seeds,
right? So, in a certain sense, a plant by
itself could invade a new territory. But as human
beings have, of course, introduced a whole lot of
plants and has speeded up this process quite a
lot, right? And have introduced plants to regions where
they're definitely not native. But we really see the
sort of rise of the invasive exotic with Darwin.
Um, SO I really, yeah, I, I, I think
that's also something that is unknown to people, right?
That, uh, but of course, when you think about
it, it really ties up nicely with the idea
of the struggle for existence, uh, where indeed you
could also find that newcomers take new places in
nature, right? And you could even argue that Darwin
says every species is an invasive exotic, in a
sense that In the evolutionary history of every species,
there have been times where it had to be
migrating to new places and become very successful in
these new places, in order to survive, right? So
I guess in a sense today invasive is really
seen as a negative quality, right? It's just something
that we do not want, but in a certain
sense you could say it's, it's really uh key
to life, right? That all plants and animals have
this invasive property to them.
So still on the topic of invasiveness, does the
size of non-native species have anything to do with
their being considered invasive or not?
Uh It, that's a difficult, hm. I think yes
and no. In a certain sense. Uh, INVASIVE exotics
are sort of this new category of weeds, right?
Where weeds are usually plants that we don't like
in our gardens or in our, uh, agricultural fields.
Uh, THESE plants are also seen as weeds, but
not, not so much weeds in in a human
domain, but weeds in a natural domain. They're sort
of the weeds of nature. And we need to
weed them out. And because they're sort of the
weeds of nature that also implies oftentimes many weeds
are like year yearlings or maybe uh biennials, right?
So they take either 1 year or 2 years
to grow. So many of the weed species that
we we find and also many of the invasive
exotics are usually like these annuals or biennials, right?
That that grow for maybe a year or 2
years. Um. Think of giant hogweed, for instance, right?
This is a biennial. So first, it makes a
big leaves, makes big leaves and and uh the
first year, and then the second year it makes
this huge inflorescence, right? And uh definitely seen also
here in the Netherlands as an invasive exotic, but,
um, so usually I think it's annual annuals, but
then there's also Invasive exotics that are longer lived,
right? That are trees. So for instance, we have
what's called the tree of heaven here, uh, Aleonus.
Let me see if I can find the name.
Yeah, yeah, Aliontus Altissima, for instance, is the tree
of heaven. So that's really a tree species and
you can see it growing, uh, um, well, basically
everywhere in the Netherlands, um, uh, as, as, as
a, as an invasive exotic, but it's definitely a
tree species, so. I'm not sure if size matters.
What, what is interesting is that usually when there
is a certain use to a plant, when they're,
or when they're very aesthetically pleasing, we don't mind
as much if they're a bit invasive. So, for
instance, we have cranberries here on the Wadden Islands
in the Netherlands, and that's an exotic, but it's
grown a lot by people too, and it's very
appreciated and it's part of the sort of the
diet of people and But also other other trees
and plants are, are highly prized even though they
are exotic and sometimes even successful. Um, SO, yeah,
so sometimes when they serve other purposes as well,
they're treated a little bit differently, but I don't
think size matters all that much and when it
comes to invasive species.
OK. So are plants intelligent? I mean, is there
such a thing as plant intelligence? And if so,
in what ways are they intelligent?
Yeah, so this is, this has caused a little
bit of a, or at least there's a little
bit of a discussion about this, and I think
So I usually in my classes don't really answer
the question if they are really intelligent or not,
cause I think the one of the main problems
is that Like, similar to that, we don't really
know what wilderness means. I don't think we also
really know anymore what what intelligence means, right? Now,
we use it all the time and we don't
have a problem using it, and oftentimes when we
talk about intelligence and all the different connotations it
has, it deals with human beings, maybe a little
bit with animals, right? Some of the animals, um,
but, uh, or, or maybe these days a lot
more animals are are are are seen as intelligent.
Um, THERE'S definitely Champions of this idea, right? I
mean, people like Frans de Wall or other thinkers
as well that, that talk about other minds, right?
Uh, WE know of cephalopods octopide being very Being
very intelligent. Um, SO I think animal intelligence is
becoming more of a general notion, but then we
reached the plant kingdom, right? Or the fungal kingdom
or bacteria, and I think There it becomes too
many people very strange to talk about intelligence because.
Intelligence applies so much for us, right? It implies
IQ EQ, you know, all these different. You know,
um, yeah, differences between people and how smart they
are, etc. ETC. RIGHT? And And of course, with
plans that so that becomes a lot a lot
more tricky, but I, I think it's sort of
a sign of the times that that we don't
really have a good answer to this question. What
is intelligence, right? Um, THERE'S this great article. By
Shane Hutter and uh. Chain leg and oh and
I forget about the name, but it's, but it
basically starts this article with, well, we talk about
artificial intelligence, but it's sort of a little bit
of a problem that we don't really know what
intelligence is, right? There's all these different definitions and
all these different fields, but do we really know
what it is and I'll tell you to, so
This was the So the interesting thing is this
is really an idea that starts with Darwin again.
So, in the final book that Darwin writes on,
on, on plants, the power of movement in plants,
he finishes in a very strange manner. So, for
pages on end, he talks about all the different
environmental cues that Planned roots, but also other parts
of the plant take from their surroundings to dictate
sort of, or to help navigate their surroundings, to
help move, to help, you know, put their leaves
in the right position, etc. ETC. And after sort
of writing about this for a long time, he
ends on this notion of, OK, so if a
plant root, the plant, the tip of a root
takes in all these environmental cues to help it
navigate the soil. Could we not say that it's
comparable to, like, the brain in the anterior end
of a lower animal, like an earthworm? You know,
is is a root tip not a little bit
comparable to an earthworm, where an earthworm also takes
any environmental cues from its surroundings and navigates the
soil. How is it different from this plant root?
And there we see this notion of planned intelligence
arising, right? What's later been called the root brain
hypothesis, that for some reason, The root tip acts
a little bit like the brain of an animal.
Now, This is highly debated, right? Because you can't
really look into a plant and find a brain,
right? Um, THERE'S no central nervous system. There's, they
lack many things, right? But nonetheless, for Darwin, the
reason is, well, If we take in, if it
takes in all these environmental cues, it would still
need to deliberate. It would still need to make
a sort of choice, right? So, say, though, there's
a center of gravity, but there is also an
an obstacle, right? Um, IT can't really then navigate,
you know, downwards and follow the center of gravity.
It would sort of need to say, OK, we're
not following the direction of gravity. I'm doing something
completely different because I've hit an obstacle. So, these
different environmental cues are given different sort of, there's
sort of this hierarchy, right? That if we reach
an impediment, no longer follow the center of gravity,
but take a different route, right? Um. So, he,
in this deliberation and this sort of making choices
on how to navigate, he sees this as maybe
a very preliminary form of intelligence, and especially his
son Francis Darwin, takes this notion a bit further,
right? And I think what I What I like
about it is that they're sort of having this
cybernetic argument on intelligence, where later on, when the
rise of cybernetics, and people like Norbert Wiener, uh
my namesake, right, he, he says that In order
to have an intelligent machine or or an animal
or a plant, you really need to stack different
feedback mechanisms on top of one another, right? And
you need to have a sort of feedback mechanism
where there's a perception of the surroundings, and there
is an automated process and that whether you look
at life or you look at machinery, if you
want to have goal oriented behavior, if you want
to have complex behavior, you really need a whole
lot of feedback mechanisms. And that maybe in essence,
this is what intelligence is about. It's a sort
of feedback mechanism. And Francis Darwin takes this to
mean that, well, maybe that means that intelligence is
not something that is predominantly human, maybe not even
something that occurs with humans and some of the
higher animals, but that intelligence is really something that
occurs in life, and that life is sort of
characterized by intelligence. And some people nowadays claim like
that evolutionary process is a blind process that comes
up with intelligible solutions to problems. Right? That's so
that the whole process in and of itself. Makes
intelligence solutions arise more or less. So, this is
the reason that Darwin talks about plant intelligence, right?
And I I like it, but it also I
think it leaves me wondering like, I don't think
we know what intelligence means. I just don't think
there's one there's gonna be one definition. So maybe
it really has to do with how useful is
this notion to us. And also, do we want
to use the same word, maybe even, right? Uh,
LIKE, for instance, I find with Darwin that many
times he doesn't like to use the same word
as we use, for instance, with animals. So when
he talks about The so-called sleep movements of plants,
so many plants, when, you know, the sun sets,
they drop their leaves, or they fold their leaves
up. And then when the sun rises again, they
open up their leaves. And he says, I don't
want to call this sleep because does it serve
the same biological function as sleep? Probably not. So
he, he, he comes up with a different word,
right? And I think this sort of stresses this
point where And that's maybe the main problem with
plant intelligence that you also don't wanna turn the
plant into an animal, saying or turn a plant
into a human, saying, well, all the characteristics we
have, the plant also shares, where, in fact, it
could very well be the case that plants are
very, very different from us, and that, well, maybe
you don't need a brain to survive, right? They
clearly show that without a brain you can survive
pretty well, so maybe we've put far too much.
Uh, HOW do you say? Attention on intelligence, right?
Or far too much importance on intelligence, and that
maybe having a brain is all not that important,
right? That you're perfectly capable of surviving without one.
So I, I go back and forth between If
plants are really intelligent or not, but I think
the nice thing about the question is that it
highlights that this problem we have, that it's it's
very, becomes, it's becoming very hard for us to
explain what intelligence is. Mhm.
So, uh, of course, if plants have some sort
of intelligence, I'm not sure if we would be
able then to talk about plant psychology as well,
but, uh, do we know if the plant, OK,
OK,
that's fine. Some people, some people do. I, you
know, I, it doesn't really help. So for, yeah,
but, but, but continue because you were you were
you were heading somewhere.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I was going to ask you,
do we know if plants have some kind of
personality?
Um, So it's something that Um, so I think
here you run, you sort of run into that
problem, right? Where we take this word that has
a whole lot of meaning when it comes to
humans, also has some meaning when it comes to
animals, maybe, and we see if we can find
an equivalent in the plant kingdom, and I think
in some cases that that's maybe a bit misguided,
right? So, um, for instance, plant communication is something
that's well established. We know that Plants can release
volatile chemicals, and that these volatile chemicals can be
messages that warn other plants or that do even
more complex things, right? Have show more complex ecological
interactions. So there's really no debate on plant communication,
even though it's a wild notion, right? To think
of plants having this chemical language, and to, and
then them being able to communicate, um, that is
quite a wild notion, but it's not debated as
such. Well, I think plant intelligence maybe it's it's
a little bit harder to show, OK, but why
do we need it, right? Why do we need
to have this word, or especially also with personality.
Do we need the word personality when it comes
to plants? Does it explain something, right? And now
I found that. Indeed, if you take personality to
mean that they are so so called individual differences,
right, between different members of the same species. So,
for instance, one plant. Has um a certain reaction
to it being attacked by aphids, for instance, right?
So, it starts to change its chemical composition, uh,
or it might respond to certain communications, right? Um,
AND then a different plant will have a little
bit of a different response, and this is repeatable,
right? It, it's clearly shown that they have a
little bit of different strategies on how to allocate
energy, how to How to Sort of interact with
their environment. Now there have been studies showcasing this,
right? That there are indeed these sort of individual
differences between plants. Now I say individual, because this
is wherein lies the problem is that Well, a
personality, it would be nice to have an individual,
something that is not easily divided. But of course,
Here we reach a sort of the ontology of
a plant is that a plant is not an
individual in that sense, right? Like we are an
individual. So a plant Well, for the first part,
it has a very plastic nature, right? So we
can see that. Like our brain is very plastic,
but our body is not so plastic, right? We
have a certain. Ontogenetic plan, and there's, you know,
from an embryo to a human being, that's a
pretty, that's a, I mean, there can definitely be
environmental conditions that can influence your growth, but for,
for the most part, it's a sort of fixed
track or trajectory. While in plants, that's not the
case at all, right? A dandelion growing in between
the cracks of the pavement looks different than when
it's in a, in a lawn, right? The the
leaves are different. There can be all sorts of
differences. So this plasticity is definitely, I'd say, a
lot more there in plants, right? Like, we have
a very plastic brain. Plants seem to have a
very plastic physiology. Um, BUT They're not really individuals
in a certain sense, because you can divide them,
right? So some people say they're divium, right? They're
there's something that doesn't really have a center. It's
more decentralized. It's more of a modular type of
growth, right? Almost like a fractal type of growth,
where you can take, um, you know, you can
take a cutting from a plant and, and, and,
and, you know, fix it to another plant, or
you can take, um, you know, maybe root stock
and then have another plant, right? We know this
because we use it in agriculture. So In that
sense, I think it's tricky, like, right, that You
want to sort of stay clear of a sort
of uh anthropomorphizing plants, right? Making them into human
beings with personalities. Now, I think we also sort
of need to appreciate how different, even though we
share a common ancestor very, very far back in
evolutionary history, there's so much difference to us as
well, where We don't really necessarily know a whole
lot about what we're dealing with, right? It's not
individual, it's not. I mean, It's not really um
But nonetheless, it's, it's it's interacting in a very
complex way with its surroundings, right? So maybe we
have still just a very poor understanding of this,
of this complexity. Now I say this. Of course,
there are great scientists working on what plants do
on a microscopic and a microscopic and an ecological
scale. Definitely not wanting to say that they're, they,
they are somehow missing something. But I think maybe
in general, the general public, it's not sometimes maybe
missed a little bit like how, how different, how
other the plant is, and that we might not
be very capable as a primate, you know, having
done science for a couple of centuries, to, to
really unlock all these diff all these um You
know, to, to, yeah, to, to really find out
all these differences, right? And to really appreciate these
differences. Like, are we smart enough to To know
about planned intelligence. You know, you know, what we
hold as intelligence, it's very human oriented, right? Tool
use, communication, altruism, you know, all these different characteristics
that are characteristic to our evolutionary trajectory. We've, we,
in our evolutionary track, we have, uh, you know,
tool making and tool use. Many animals, of course,
don't. Uh, DOES that make them less sophisticated? Well,
probably not, right? We don't really have a measure
to say, well, tool making, and we have I
don't know, like bat bats use sonar, right? How
do you compare the two? Which one is better?
You know, that, that, that's very, that becomes very
hard to say. So, this is a complex answer
to maybe an easy question, like do plants have
a personality? I think in a certain sense, you
could definitely talk about these sort of individual differences
in plants, but to call it a personality, I
think it implies too much, right? It's almost like,
It shows this, this, this tendency to make plants
and animals into equivalents, while there are actually also
wide differences between the two.
So I have one last question and then perhaps
we should have tackled it right at the beginning,
but I left it for the end because I
think it would be very interesting for you to
tell us your ideas about it, uh, just before
we wrap up our conversation. So, Why should people
care about plants? I mean, since we have this
plant blindness as we talked about in the very
beginning of our interview. Yeah. Uh, I mean, what
are, what would you say are the main reasons
why people should care about plants? Why do plants
matter?
So, Um, So, uh, a twofold answer. So first
of all, I think they matter a whole lot
because uh as compared to our primate relatives, we
are a gardening ape, right? Uh, EVEN though many
of the, the, the great apes have great knowledge
of plants, uh, we're the only ones that have
gardens, and we just don't just have one garden,
we have uh a whole plethora of different garden
types, and It shows that, I mean, Choosing this
path, right, this symbiotic path of plants and humans.
Has, well, not only changed us. A whole lot,
but has made us highly dependent on planned and
planned survival. I mean, And I mean, this has
been appreciated by other people as well, right? There's
this great book that's called The Death of Grass,
right, which talks about uh a virus breaking out
amongst rice plants that mutates into a virus that
hits all grass species. And then the protagonists in
the story find out how dependent we are on
Grain, right, or wheat, rice, corn. These three grass
species, only 3 grass species, right, of 11,000 grass
species, take care of 50% of our calorie intake
worldwide. That's Let's say that's a very weak foundation
to build a civilization on three dominant grass species,
especially considering the fact that they can be hit
by diseases, right? We know this to happen, to
occur. And this is true for Many of the
plants we use, we hardly usually know anything about
their origins. We don't really know where they come
from. We don't really know who who cultivates them,
unless you're from the place. But we're highly dependent
in our survival, right? It's the wood in our
construction, it's the clothes we wear, it's the fuel
we put in our cars, it's, I mean, plants
are all around and our, I mean, we are
not as dominant if if we didn't, we didn't
make sure that plants, some plants are dominant as
well, right? So, I think this is a point
that's not, that that's not really appreciated, especially since
we're so city orientated, right? We don't necessarily take
take into account farming as being so important, but
this is a mutualistic situation, right? We talk about
the domestication of plants and animals, but they've domesticated
us as well, right? It's a, it's a mutualistic
track we're on. So, we're really dependent on their
survival as well. But we're not really necessarily very
interested in their survival, right? And this is where
it becomes a bit stressing. Is that, of course,
there's many people interested in the survival of rice
and corn, etc. BUT then many people don't have
a clue. And I think for the survival of
our species, it's, it's it's it's utmost importance that
plants thrive as well. Now, beside it, cause that's
a very human-centered way of looking at things, right?
They're very important for our survival, so we should
have maybe a bit more appreciation for the fact
that they are there. Um, BUT then there's just
also just, and this is a bit the romantic
in me. Of finding the planned world to be
highly interesting, right? And not only their capabilities, but
also their diversity, um. I mean, I'm always When
I started this sort of track and reading more
in botany and collecting books on botany, and visiting
botanical gardens, my appreciation for plants has only grown
and grown and grown, right? It's so, I mean,
it's a, it's an amazing world to, to, to
to be able to look into. And we have
so much information on plants as well that we
can, we can really appreciate all the plant kingdom
for, for, for what it is and all the
ecological surfaces it has, right? Uh, SO I guess
also just maybe a little bit more decoupled from
humans, I think. Plants are just super interesting, so.
Maybe we should, you know, scratch ourselves a little
bit behind the ears and, and, and sort of
think about why do we place so much attention
on animals, right? Why, uh, I mean, for good
reasons, and animals are very interesting too, but we
should not forget that plants are, well, at least
as interesting as animals as well, right? So, so,
I I I think it's also sort of a
call to say, you know, if you look into
Plants, you, you're gonna find a whole lot of
surprising uh things about life, right? And about and
great examples of evolution and great examples of ecology.
And uh so, so in that sense, I think
appreciation of plant life is definitely do.
Mhm. And what kinds of topics will you be
working on in the near future when it comes
to botanic philosophy?
So I've I've I've finished my dissertation, which needs
to still be checked by the commission. So hopefully
doing my defense. And uh um so about invasion
ecology and the sort of the the the the
rise of this this knowledge of invasive exotics, which
we discussed, um, and I really want to work
on my, on my book on this sort of
cultural and natural history on weeds. Cause I think,
you know, weeds is a is a very interesting
category of plants because they don't exist without humans,
right? It's a sort of, what is a weed
is a sort of relational property, right? It's certain
plants that we dislike. And um I'm just curious
to find out why do we dislike him? What
reasons did we make for this? How are we
using weeds also in a metaphorical sense to talk
about humans, to talk about, well, I mean, there's
Well, there's a lot to say about weeds, and
I think it really also showcases uh our own
nature, right? And, and how, how we are gardeners,
and how we, you know, all of us have
weeded plants before, which is quite astonishing, right? And
all of us are weeders in that sense. Um,
SO yeah, I think that that question is super
interesting, like, what is a weed and and why
do we think of certain plants as being so
villainous or so, so, uh, so detrimental, yeah.
And where can people find you and your work
on the internet?
Uh, SO I, I, I, I have a website,
um, or maybe just Google my name, Norah Peters,
and then Botani Sofita Sofi Pinel is my, is
my website, which is not super up to date,
but there's definitely some lectures I gave in my
books that I wrote, and, um, you can find
me at Wani University where I teach, um, and,
um, yeah, just Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, I'm on all
the social media platforms as well. So, uh, yeah,
definitely have a look. I mean, most of the
things I write are in Dutch, and most of
the talks I do are in Dutch too, but
there's definitely also some English stuff there, um, yeah,
and hopefully in the future more, so, yeah, that's
about it.
Yeah, great. So, Norbert, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been really fun to talk with you.
Thank you, Ricardo, thanks for the invitation.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrook
field governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro
and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Frankortolotti Gabriel
Ponscorteus Slelisky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernardin Curtis
Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Giancarlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.